---
title: Please Like Me
layout: portfolio/default
index: 2
description: An introductory essay by Emily Saeli
---
Dear Reader,

I used to read under my desk at school. From the second grade on, I would have notes sent home that said, “Emily exhibits a complete failure to listen to oral instructions. If the instructions are written on the board, she’ll have no problem. But if I tell the class what to do, she frequently messes up. She’s just not paying attention.” My report cards were perfect except for “Oral instructions.” My parents were frustrated—I was confused. Wasn’t reading a good thing? Who cared? Just write the instructions on the board and I’d be fine. As I aged, and became an even bigger smart-ass, I told them that they were lucky to have a kid like me. My writing assignments were wildly creative. They rarely answered the question, even when it was written, but damn were they good. My teachers wanted me to work harder, but my creativity, brought on my true hubris about the situation at large, satisfied the most extreme scenarios. In most instances, my teachers would keep me in from recess. Not the world’s best plan, as those kids were asked to stay in the library during that time.

In the fifth grade, I finally got my perfect report card. It probably had more to do with the change in teacher. I didn’t learn anything, nothing really changed in my personality, attitude toward reading or writing or authority. I’ve written about this time in my life, and I reference the lessons I learned much later in Learning Goal One. But it took me a long time to get there. In that time, I struggled with the balance between my creativity and resistance to boundaries, what I will sometimes call my hubris, and the “hard work” that my teachers were expected. Couldn’t they see how smart I was? It wasn’t until much later that I learned to balance these things, blend creativity of narrative and voice with the expectations of the reader. Until I learned to first control and then manipulate my applied humanity, it was useless to me. In this portfolio, I attempt to harness some of that wild hubris and the lessons I’ve learned about “hardness” of work into a wholly human thing.

I am a human being first, and a writer second. In light of my opening story, I am a human first, an arrogant little kid, still reading under her desk second, and a writer third. There is indeed an in-between space between being totally human and totally a writer. I am filled with flaws; at times, the best I can do is allow that flow of flaws to color the subject, rhythm, and humanity of my work. The human element has always been an important part of my writing because I want my audience to understand where I’m coming from at all times, and empathize with me even when my thoughts aren’t perfectly organized. Rarely are my thoughts perfectly organized. Narrative and extra-narrative tools (memes, images, etc) are used to coax and convince the reader that, not only am I an effective writer, I’m a multi-dimensional human being. I’d say that the benefit of the doubt that you’d give to a harebrained friend might best describe the emotion I try to cultivate in my audience as I revise out the harebrained nature of my thoughts. My style is more than colloquial; it attempts to be friendly as it persuades. The strength of this portfolio is in how I embrace my flaws, not in the absence of them. The tradeoff is that I never once attempt to conceal my humanity and all its shortcomings from my reader; you will have to embrace my style to the extent that I do in order to receive this portfolio as I’ve intended.

They say that struggle makes for a good narrative, and I’ve tried to incorporate my struggles into my overarching narrative. That’s relatable, right? The questions I have sought to answer in this portfolio revolve around, not only how I’ve developed, but how I’ve worked through personal difficulties to get to that development. I’ve been the product of the struggle between my own hard work and hubris for four years now. Hard work, because this portfolio would have never been finished without it.  Hubris because it often allowed me the mindset necessary to push assignments beyond their original intention; I could dare to imagine that my conception of the paper was more creative than the teacher’s. Hard work, hardness of work, is the struggle my teachers have always been encouraging, hubris is the struggle that I am still attempting to balance with the creative and academic expectations of my reality.

Hard work is the struggle we encourage. I feel like my struggle with hard work and difficulty equates itself to the search for hard answers in my portfolio. I do not give up, do not give the easy answer, sophomore year when a Writing Colleague student presents a difficult question to me; instead, I muse over the question in Learning Goal 2. That question, how we can balance our personal experiences with the challenges that our writing provides, is fundamentally human. The answer changes how we adapt to new information, and whether we choose to adapt at all. Seeking the difficult answers, or, more likely, learning how to proceed without all the answers, is useful for thinking like a writing major, and is encouraged right down to the language of our learning goals. We teach our students to explore, write discovery drafts, do not commit to evidence that you cannot analyze, that you don’t have the answer for. This is the hardness that we encourage, and part of the struggle that has manifested in the body of my portfolio.

Hubris is the struggle that I am still attempting to balance with the creative and academic expectations of my reality. Here is the hardheaded smart-ass of my youth who would rather sacrifice the expectations of the audience for pure, unadulterated creativity. She’s a blast at parties, but not so fun if you’re a reader, trying to interpret the stylistic choices I’ve made in the past. I write specifically about this process in learning Goal Three. I argue there that I do allow my audience’s perspective to color the way that I write—how much of my humanity and voice I allow to slip into the piece. Here, I argue that, as my audience, you may need to remember my needs as a human when reading this portfolio, and understand that I have not let the girl-who-read-under-her-desk run completely wild in return.

It is impossible to divest my humanity from many of the choices I’ve made in this portfolio. The selections for the appendix rely mostly on pieces I am proud of. The choice I made to write those pieces rest on my own passion for specific subjects or types of narrative or instances of learning. I would not have chosen my essay from Digital Rhetoric if I weren’t proud of the collection and breakdown of evidence from the popular online game “League of Legends.” I would not have picked that topic in the first place if I were not a giant nerd.

There is a stylistic element in my pieces, the desire to be both understood and empathized with, influences how the underlying arguments in my portfolio play out. One of the themes I’d identify is how the learning process is an ongoing one, counteracting the total hubris of my youth that assumed I knew what was best. In the discussions of learning goal one, I detail first how my idea of knowledge through the processes of reading and writing has evolved and how my reading experiences have added depth and perspective to the way I write. In learning goal two, I admit that there is so much I don’t know, especially as it relates to how we strike a balance between the information we teach and our students’ identities. In learning goal three, I discuss how adaptation is necessary with a consideration of audience, and my own, imperfect, attempts at that. The emergence of the theme of ongoing learning is accentuated by honesty about possible moments of my own self-confidence, like an unwillingness to revise my first piece of published work, Galatea, because I had done so well the first time, or assumptions that my opinion about a subject are enough to teach it to my peers. These moments of humanity are calculated to accentuate the argument and win over the audience (although that doesn’t mean you shouldn’t laugh at my memes in the process), but they do reveal the ultimate balance I am trying to strike between my all-too human impulses and my drive to find the tough answers. Anything else would be dishonest.

The role of narrative is overt in my portfolio, as it is presented in the first person, my personal voice. Learning Goal nine is especially important in describing how narrative functions in the rest of my work, because it allows me to explore that balance between the audience and emotional appeals beyond the usually subtle colloquial phrases of my more analytical papers. Learning Goal seven also allowed me to use narrative in a way that was more emotional than many of the portfolio appendix pieces. I had the opportunity to describe how a heartbreak led to a piece of writing, and I desperately didn’t want to be mocked for it, as if my piece could be downgraded to lovesick diary entry somehow. As such, I litter the discussion with empathetic and humorous appeals, like, “see: crappy romance” and admittances of selfishness during the process itself.

It might be an inherently a defensive maneuver to create a portfolio which enforces its themes through inherently human appeals and colloquialisms, but that stylistic strategy reflects my entire body of work. I want my audience to feel as if they are reading the work of a real person. I want you to appreciate the balance and the struggle with the expected struggles, hard work and hubris, that I am still working to balance. I want my themes to come across as believable, not just because of the situational evidence I provide, but because they came from someone real. However, as you read my portfolio, you should know that, despite any syntactical waffling, I stand by every word I’ve written. I’d just rather that the process makes you remember, not only the themes I presented, but how it made you feel as well.

Finally, I would posit this to you. This portfolio has been revised, sweat on, spilled on, cried over, ignored for large periods of time while I read on top of my desk, and embraced into the heart of what I consider some of my most honest work, not necessarily in that order. I’ve demonstrated both ends of struggle, from that which is encouraged to that we try and breed out of our students. I’ve come to be a person who would probably pass a third grade report card. To do this, to make this as human as possible, I felt like I had to sacrifice something. In order to embrace fallibility, I had to first break any façade with my reader that I was ever a complete authority. In order to create honesty, first I had to accept my imperfections. This is a weird place for a writer to be, because I need my reader to be on-board

So here’s my invitation. I am human, not perfect. This portfolio has flaws, but it is strengthened by them. I will not attempt to envelope my reader in an ethos that is completely compelling, but instead I will invite you into the fold to explore humanity from the perspective of a Real Human (TM). You will need to come willingly, buy into some of the rhetoric I am spouting about humanity and truth and hubris, but I promise it will be worth it.

Emily Saeli
