---
title: Analysis of "How to Tame a Wild Tongue"
---
In “How to Tame a Wild Tongue,” Author Anzaldua makes several arguments, one of which is that her sense of self and identity are directly tied to her language. In the following passage, her argument leads into the assertion that, to limit the language of the Chicano people while at the same time promoting the English language alone is a sin. She says,

> “So, if you really want to hurt me, talk badly about my language. Ethnic identity is twin skin to linguistic identity—I am my language. Until I can take pride in my language, I cannot take pride in myself. Until I can accept as legitimate Chicano Texas Spanish, Tex-Mex and all the other language I speak, I cannot accept the legitimacy of myself. Until I am free to write bilingually and to switch codes without having always to translate, while I still have to speak English or Spanish when I would rather speak Spanglish, and as long as I have to accommodate the English speakers rather than having them accommodate me, my tongue will be illegitimate.
>
> I will no longer be made to feel ashamed of existing. I will have my voice: Indian, Spanish, white. I will have my serpent’s tongue—my woman’s voice, my sexual voice, my poet’s voice. I will overcome the tradition of silence.”

In the passage, Anzaldua equates herself to her language in a very exposing, emotional way. Freedom and “legitimacy” are directly tied to the movement she is fighting for, and she makes a very passionate case for it. Anzaldua strives to make it clear that her many languages are a source of identity for her throughout her entire text, but she highlights this message in this one paragraph through her uses of tropes and by leaving out the code switching that takes place in the rest of the text. The snake metaphor, her use of synecdoche and the code switching all blend together to make Anzaldua’s message very clear: she is the master of her own identity, and the choices she makes reflect her mastery over the dual languages.

One of the most impactful tropes that Anzaldua uses to make her point in this passage is synecdoche. Synecdoche is used when someone refers to a “whole” something in terms of a small part of that thing.  The small part thus becomes more important when equated with the whole. This magnification of one small part plays to Anzaldua’s advantage when she states early on in her passage, “I am my language.” In this scenario, the “whole” is Anzaldua, all of her. The small part, which she uses to reference herself, is her language. She is setting up here the framework for the argument that follows later in the passage, in which she says that her language makes up such a huge part of her identity; it’s almost a crime to take that away from her. Her “code switching” and Chicano language are just two parts of her identity, but by drawing them out through synecdoche, she makes them all the more important.

The synecdoche in this instance makes a lot of sense for Anzaldua to be using in this passage too. She is trying to equate her identity with her language, she is essentially saying “See me as my language” when that was the very thing she hated earlier in her essay. Then, she had said, “I remember being caught speaking Spanish at recess—that was good for three licks on the knuckles with a sharp ruler. I remember being sent to the corner of the classroom for ‘talking back’ to the Anglo teacher when all I was trying to do was tell her how to pronounce my name.” She had described these instances in school where she was seen as nothing more than her Chicano languages. The thought is reversed when she *embraces* that way of thinking in this passage, and the effect created is more powerful than if she had just spoken about how her teachers used to view her. What this does is highlight the passage, and the message about her language and her identity, in the eyes of the reader. It is important that Anzaldua makes this seeming contradiction. She is claiming the Chicano language as her own, but making it explicitly clear that she doesn’t want it claimed for her. The power in the choice is derived from the synecdoche, and the result is Anzaldua making *her* identity known. The audience will instantly know this is important, because of the nature of the synecdoche and the seeming contradiction it contains.

Outside of just this passage, another one of the most prevalent of Anzaldua’s highly metaphorical themes is the snake. She begins her essay in this vein by describing her tongue, and though she never actually equates it to a snake, it is implicit in the opening few lines when she says, “‘We’re going to have to do something about your tongue,’ I hear the anger rising in his voice. My tongue keeps pushing out the wads of cotton, pushing back the drills, the long, thin needles.”  This very first image is similar to Anzaldua’s later idea of a “serpent’s tongue” in that her tongue, an object already snake like appearance, is moving and writhing around, as if alive.  By the time my passage comes around, the snake image is still very prevalent and very important. She says, “I will have my serpent’s tongue—my woman’s voice, my sexual voice.” This statement is very important for a number of reasons. Firstly, it is a connection back to that initial image, where her tongue was clearly serpentine but she never actually stated as such. That in itself highlights the paragraph and makes it important because it’s as if she’s saying “Here is my message, I will spell it out for you if I have to.” The effect is similar to seeing the title of a book mentioned somewhere in the chapter you are reading—it makes you acutely aware that the passage and the message contained within is important. Secondly, the difference in the meaning of the word “serpent” makes a huge difference when interpreting the message of the passage, and Anzaldua clearly chose it for this reason. There are two possible interpretations of the word, and they both play a key role in the final impact of the paragraphs. For any Mexican or Chicano readers, the image of a snake is a good one. Going back to Native American roots, the serpent has long since been a symbol of life, and fertility. Seeing a snake compared to an author in an essay would bring up positive connotations for the Chicano reader, not negative ones. On the opposite side of the coin, primarily English readers would bring their own connotations of the snake to the table, preconceived notions that Anzaldua clearly alludes too. One of the foundations, or examples, of the snake being “evil” in America and Western Europe comes from the story of Adam and Eve. Snakes, here are “tempters” and they do the devil’s work. Anzaldua specifically alludes to this when she says, “I will have my *serpent’s* tongue—my *woman’s* voice, my *sexual* voice.” These three things are very connected in the story of Adam and Eve. When Eve eats the apple, and then convinces Adam to do the same, she forever condemns women to a life of painful childbirths, and to the justification of male dominated society because of her “weakness.” This is the version of the snake that and English reader would first assume, because this is just one common cultural definition of the trope.

These two interpretations are very important. Just like her spoken language, Chicanos are inclined to view her in a more positive light, but because of this very same speech English speakers are likely to wish that she conformed to their language. The English speakers view as negative what the Chicanos see as positive, and helpful. The juxtaposition of these two ideals in one sentence makes this particular paragraph, and subsequently the message, stand out from the rest. The Chicano readers will appreciate her use of the image, while English readers will recognize her unapologetic attitude for the misdeeds of Eve, and the weight of the words behind that message. For the English reader, she might also be saying that this is a new and controversial message, because the snake is often the bearer of controversy. If you apply the theme of Adam and Eve once again, Anzaldua could possibly be equating her message to the Fruit of Knowledge that the couple consumed. In this instance, her idea, like the Fruit of Knowledge, brings an unpredicted and controversial knowledge to the human race, and brings with it the impact that seems to say, “this is a world-changing revelation.” Such an allusion certainly makes the ideas surrounding it seem all the more impactful, and again highlights the point she is trying to make by bringing that worldly shock.

Switching between the two meanings of snake, much like switching between two languages, accomplishes something for Anzaldua. The incorporation of the ambiguous snake metaphor represents the choice she is making yet again, between languages. She is choosing to incorporate both possible meanings of the name in a mix, much like the Chicano language, but in doing so, is claiming her right to use whichever culture she assigns herself at the time. She will not have it chosen for her, and she switches between the two to show it.

One thing that is very clear about the entirety of Anzaldua’s text is her use of what she calls, “code switching.” She flits between English and her many other languages as she writes, because that is her truest voice. For example, in one section she says, “But Chicano Spanish is a border tongue which developed naturally. Change, *evolución, enriquecimiento de palabras neuvas por invención o adopción* have created variants of Chicano Spanish, *un nuevo, lenguaje*.” This quote shows how often she switches between “codes” and how naturally it comes to her. However, since the message of the chosen passage is an equation of her sense of identity to her language, it stands out that my passage contains no code switching at all.  It would seem apparent that when describing her “self” she uses a little bit of Chicano Spanish at least, but it is lacking in this section. The reason for this is probably that Anzaldua recognized that, as important as code switching was to her, it was slightly distracting to any non-Chicano speakers. I know that I found myself having to stop and look up parts of her Spanish, which may have taken away from her argument at times. This particular argument, the message that language and identity are one and the same, is so very important to Anzaldua that she is willing to shed her “twin skins” in her writing at least for a time for the sake of the clarity and survival of that message. Without Spanish to distract an English reader from the message in any way, she hopes that what she is imparting will be all the more clear and impactful.

The “serpent’s tongue” image can also be reapplied to this idea of “code switching.” Although Anzaldua takes one stance, one clearly translatable language for the sake of the argument, she does not limit her metaphorical language to one culture. She may have to preserve the clarity of the passage with the lack of code switching, but she does not have to stick to the interpretations of one culture alone. If code switching would have taken away from her argument in any way, including the snake trope definitely added the dimensions of two cultures to the argument, cultures that she does not weigh but rather, lets speak for themselves on the issue of snakes. These cultural allusions also take place on a different mental level than the basic language of the passage, so they don’t distract from the message in any way like code switching potentially would have done. Like the snake trope, Anzaldua is making a distinct choice for her reader that she can choose whichever language she wants. It is very important that, at the moment that she is claiming her right to switch “codes,” she uses no Spanish whatsoever. This power move of hers functions as a sort of message to say that, “I have the right to choose my language of the moment, and I will not be forced into either even if I am talking about code switching.”

Anzaldua makes a very clear case for the legitimization of all her many languages. She does not feel strongly connected to her languages—she feels as if she *is* the sum of all her languages. This is one of the most important messages in her essay, “How to Tame a Wild Tongue,” and so it is reasonable that the passage that brings this idea to its fruition stands out in its language. She does this through tropes, like synecdoche and the snake imagery, but also by leaving behind her beloved code switching for the sake of the argument. The combinations of these three things highlight the passage in the reader’s mind and makes her very important argument stand out even more.