---
title: "A Case for Girls in Feminism: A Feminist's Look at the EFF's \"A Case for Psuedonyms\""
---
The EFF as a whole makes an effort to stay away from gendered language. This might be because they don’t wish to alienate any of their readers, or because so many of their documents attempt to be legal in nature. However, in cases where gendered pronouns would be useful, or the recognition of female activists to balance out a plethora of male examples, the EFF, or the Electronic Frontier Foundation, falls short. The EFF, which hosts a variety of artifacts, also produces a blog called “Deep Links.” In a Deep links Blog post from 2011 entitled, “A Case for Pseudonyms,” the author Jillian York defends a user’s right to anonymity online and discusses the many at-risk groups, which would disappear if not allowed to use pseudonyms or anonymous names. The author discusses Geek Feminism, which champions anonymity online, but instead of focusing on the impacts anonymity can have on women or transgendered individuals, she focuses on male stories. Despite her obvious effort to leave gender out of the discussion, Jillian’s use of a single feminist example without any female pronouns, amongst a myriad of male examples is problematic. This artifact highlights a useful argument about about anonymity taking place on the web, but the possible attempt to not talk about gender leads to the effect of the reader assuming that those largest impacted by this issue are men. 

The largest absence in gendered discourse takes place in the fact that women are never mentioned. York is, of course, under no obligation to list every impact of anonymity policies, but in an article that explicitly references an organization, which *does* discuss gender in terms of those who are harmed by “real names” policies, it seems egregious to take “gender” out of the equation. York’s use of this organization, “Geek Feminism,” suggests that there is a discussion of women to be had, but instead she says, “The bloggers at Geek Feminism have compiled a wiki highlighting [the people who are harmed by a real names policy](http://geekfeminism.wikia.com/wiki/Who_is_harmed_by_a_%22Real_Names%22_policy%3F){:target="_blank"}, demonstrating the hundreds of potential reasons why an individual may use a name other than his or her own.” The phrase “his or her” is intentionally nongendered, which might be good if the point that Geek Feminism is making is that anonymity *does not* impact everyone equally. The EFF blog post is distorting gendered evidence to unfairly imply that anonymity is an equal issue for everyone.

Even in her implication of who the Geek Feminism bloggers might be, York opts for gender-neutral pronouns. Of the pronouns used to discuss the bloggers (who are statistically likely not all women) and the people who might be at risk, the author intentionally uses non-gendered language to speak of the subjects. What is strange, however, is her avoidance of the question of why feminists would be concerned with anonymity online; a question that is only easily answered when one delves into the specific threats associated with being a woman online. The sterile nature of the EFF’s blog post makes it difficult to ask important questions about gender online, and leaves anyone who is not the “neutral” out of the conversation. When the “neutral” manifests itself as only men later on in the artifact, the author makes it clear through her language that she is largely interested in the places where men are the only actors.

The rest of the article employs exclusively male examples, which can make the reader feel as if this issue only affects men. The author references famous writers like Mark Twain who chose to use a pseudonym, and politicians like Publius. Again, York doesn’t have to list every user of a pseudonym, but her stylistic choice to include only men naturally excludes famous female users of pseudonyms like J.K. Rowling or female ancient Greek writers who had to remain anonymous in order to get published. Of the two specific examples the article references, “Wael Ghonim, the now-famous Egyptian whose Facebook page, [We Are All Khaled Said](https://www.facebook.com/ElShaheeed){:target="_blank"}, inspired thousands to join in the January uprising” and “Michael Anti, the Chinese journalist whose birth name is Jing Zhao.” Both of these men are referred to by male pronouns, so their masculinity isn’t disguised at all. In contrast, the femininity of any other examples was not brought to light, but was left out entirely. The implications of this stylistic choice are evident when compared to the glaring lack of female or transgender examples or pronouns. The next closest thing in the article for female examples might have been the Geek Feminism issue mentioned earlier, no specific mention is made of women who have experienced these issues, save to link them together in list form. To an average reader, this choice could imply that the only examples worth mentioning, the only people worth naming in this issue, are male.

Finally, the artifact highlights another at-risk group, transgendered teens, but makes the example pale in comparison to the men previously mentioned. The issue of transgender teens online, a topic that is dominated by discourse of gendered pronouns, is completely devoid of any discussion of gender at all. These teens’ examples, male or female, do not include a discussion of gender, of the transgender struggle, or even of the specific reason why transgendered individuals have so much to fear online. By using the example, but skating over the implications, York doesn’t do justice to the material implications transgendered teens face, especially when she devoted so much time to Wael Ghonim and Michael Anti.

“A Case for Pseudonyms” does a good job of making a case for a very specific kind of pseudonym–and ignoring the case for others. It provides examples of male political activists who had to maintain a pseudonym with no mention of the fact that ancient female politicians benefitted the most from anonymity. It gives examples of modern day male martyrs, with no counterexamples of women or transgender individuals who have suffered this everyday. This EFF may be trying to appeal to a male audience by displaying ways in which men can be impacted by pseudonym legislation online, but by doing so it cuts out those who are arguably most impacted by these laws. The EFF Deep links Blog article danced around the issue of gender in anonymity in a particularly ungraceful fashion, creating an effect of exclusion for any women or minority individuals who saw their issues alluded to, but not addressed as explicitly as male examples.