---
title: Marx and the Development of the Working Day
---
One of the most impactful terms to come out of Marx’s *Capital* is the concept of the industrial reserve army. Marx used this term to allude to the fact that workers in the capitalist system were at the whim of the capitalist—so much so that they were akin to soldiers in an army, ready to be used up and die for the system. But the word, as far as Marx uses it, extends only as far as the metaphor. The reader must look elsewhere in the text for historical context about how the industrial reserve army was formed, and how that process created the working conditions of Marx’s time. In order for his concept to function, Marx had to develop the concepts of the prolongation of the working day and the division of labor in order to add depth and historical context to his metaphor of the industrial reserve army.     

When Marx examines case studies of children in factories, or the life spans of workers, or even when he calls the capitalist a “vampire,” he is making an argument that working day conditions are, and have been, a major source of struggle for the working class. In order to understand, what was for Marx, the current struggle, he had to look into the *creation* of these conditions, namely, how the hours worked could so far exceed “necessary labor time,” and how the process could be divided into small, monotonous parts for each worker.  These struggles, amongst others, eventually contributed to the capitalist’s view of his laborers as expendable and replaceable—a key factor in the creation of the industrial reserve army. While the prolongation of the working day and the division of labor may not have directly created the industrial reserve army, both the conditions that created them, and the mentality surrounding their creation are important for understanding how the industrial reserve army developed.

Marx’s concept of the prolongation of the working day was one of the historical factors that allowed for the creation of the industrial reserve army. There are two steps to this prolongation—the stretch past “necessary” labor time for the worker, and the “current” struggle to force workers to act as machines, and perform long into the night. The first, for Marx, occurs very early on in the capitalist system. The second that the laborer exceeds his necessary labor time, it becomes surplus value that the capitalist then profits from. Capitalism relies on knowing that workers are unable to negotiate a true “equilibrium wage,” meaning that they will always be forced to produce surplus value. The term “prolongation of the working day” doesn’t actually appear until Marx describes the second type of working extension, but the initial prolongation is important as the exploitation of that surplus value serves as the very foundation for capitalism.  

The second kind of prolongation occurs when man is asked to provide more and more surplus labor, until he is asked to match the working time of machines. The impacts of the prolongation of the working day, within the framework of the struggle over the working day, are many. Marx himself listed off an interesting impact: “Besides these purely physical limitations, the extension of the working day encounters moral ones. The laborer needs time for satisfying his intellectual and social wants, the extent and number of which are conditioned by the general state of social advancement.”  The initial prolongation, past necessary labor time, is meant to shock Marx’s readers—even if it is only an extra four hours, it is four hours the capitalist has profited off of the backs of others. The secondary prolongation—the effects of which Marx was observing in factories as he wrote, was meant to call to attention the horrors of what capitalism had wrought.

Another concept that Marx needs his reader to understand order for the industrial reserve army to have any meaning is the idea of the division of labor. Marx describes this division as “a number of men may be occupied together at the same time on the same, or the same kind of work, yet the labor of each, as a part of the collective labor, may correspond to a distinct phase of the labor-process, through all whose phases, in consequence of cooperation, the subject of their labor passes with greater speed.” Essentially, all the parts of a job are divided up so one person always has one part, and the whole process moves along faster. It is the speed, the efficiency, of the laborer that the capitalist relies on, because the faster the workers produce, the greater the surplus value of their labor time. Machines also aided the speeding up process, but in a different way than the division of labor, for it was the separating of the parts that made unskilled labor so productive—rather than understand how to craft a watch or a chair or a loom, the worker only needed to understand how to fit one component into another. What was particularly harmful about the division of labor was that each worker was expected to care only for his part of the process, think only about his part of the process, and as such, becomes what Marx fears when he sardonically says that “time for education, for intellectual development, for the fulfilling of social functions, for the free play of his bodily and mental activity” just aren’t necessary anymore.

In capitalism’s pursuit of surplus labor, through the prolongation of the working day and the division of labor, a series of conditions and mentalities toward the laborer were enacted which allowed for the creation of the industrial reserve army. In order to wrest control from the working class, there had to be a consistent surplus of labor, one with “replaceable parts.” In the words of Marx, “it is self-evident that the laborer is nothing else, his whole life through, than labor power, that therefore all his disposable time is by nature and law labor-time, to be devoted to the self-expansion of capital.” This surplus kept the wage low, and the lower class unable to negotiate for better conditions. The prolongation of the working day contributed to this notion—it allowed the capitalist to see workers as a resource that was replaceable. If one worker died from exhaustion, there were always more to take his place, and so the extended hours continued. The division of labor further continued this trend, workers were literally replaceable parts of a machine; if the worker that fixed the legs on a chair was injured, a different worker could be brought in to do the same job easily. The industrial reserve army also functioned in favor of the capitalist by keeping wages low—the surplus of labor was so great, that the factory owner could replace those workers that demanded a higher wage with those that had no choice but to accept one. This system, again, relied on seeing workers as entirely replaceable, something that the struggle of the working day proved.

The industrial reserve army, and the conditions that created it, is one of Marx’s most influential concepts that he argues for in *Capital*. He uses the term to discuss the "replaceable" view of workers in the capitalist system, and the forces that will keep them in the proletariat. The term, as it stands though, exists mostly through the metaphor of an army—he doesn’t develop the historical context of it with the depth that he affords other terms, such as the prolongation of the working day and the division of labor. It makes no difference, for the reader, because the historical context he provides for his other concepts allows the reader to fully understand the impact of the industrial reserve army. By proving the historical conditions of the prolongation of the working day, and the division of labor, Marx also provides his reader with sufficient context to understand the metaphor of the industrial reserve army as a system that is exploitative, and that sees the laborers within it as entirely replaceable.